classname---H2---Introduction and key messages
classname---p---The past year saw key developments in international climate negotiations, assessment of climate science, and the continued worldwide roll-out of key lowcarbon technologies. The invasion of Ukraine has led to record highs in fossil fuel prices and highlighted the role of the low-carbon transition in providing long-term energy security. In response, new policies are being announced in many countries. The increasing global coverage of national Net Zero commitments has advanced global ambition on longer-term emissions reductions. Current commitments have the potential to limit warming to around 2ºC. However, most of these commitments are not yet backed by credible plans and Paris Agreement-aligned 2030 targets. With global emissions falling far slower than required, the 1.5ºC target risks slipping out of reach. 
classname---H2---GHG emissions
classname---p---The UK can provide a powerful example by backing up its Net Zero pathway and plans with delivery. The UK must also continue to support international efforts by strengthening the implementation of agreements made at COP26 in Glasgow such that there is clear progress by COP27 in 2022. Our key messages on the global picture are:
list---ul---The climate has continued to warm due to human activity. Major heatwaves, droughts and forest fires in many regions linked to the changing climate were seen in 2021.
subList---ul---The climate has continued to warm due to human activity. Major heatwaves, droughts and forest fires in many regions linked to the changing climate were seen in 2021.
list---ul---The IPCC finds that limiting temperature increases to 1.5ºC will require peaking of global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions as soon as possible and no later than 2025, with rapid and deep reductions towards Net Zero thereafter.
classname---H3---Global emissions.
list---ul---The IPCC finds that limiting temperature increases to 1.5ºC will require peaking of global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions as soon as possible and no later than 2025, with rapid and deep reductions towards Net Zero thereafter.
list---ul---Glasgow last November marked an overall advance in global emissions reduction ambition. These commitments bring the possibility of limiting end of-century warming to around 2ºC into view, but only if they are delivered in full and on time.
classname---H3---International climate policy.
list---ul---The new commitments made at COP26 in Glasgow last November marked an overall advance in global emissions reduction ambition. These commitments bring the possibility of limiting end of-century warming to around 2ºC into view, but only if they are delivered in full and on time.
subList---ul---However, the major gap in 2030 ambition and delivery threatens the Credibility of countries’ Net Zero targets. The Glasgow Climate Pact requests countries to strengthen their 2030 targets to align with the  Paris Agreement temperature goal by the end of 2022.
classname---H3---Low-carbon technologies.
list---ul---There is continuing progress in the adoption of key low-carbon technologies with sustained global growth in renewable power. Electric cars and heat pumps are becoming more established and cheaper in major markets.
classname---H3---Forests.
list---ul---Estimated global tree cover loss has stayed broadly constant at around 25 Mha/year from 2018-2021. The Glasgow Leaders’ Declaration on Forests and Land Use was launched at COP26 in November 2021, committing to collectively halt and reverse forest loss by 2030. Its signatories cover 90% of the world’s forests.
classname---H3---Ukraine.
list---ul---The invasion of Ukraine by Russia, and resulting record highs in fossil fuel prices, reinforce the case for a rapid transition away from fossil fuels. The high prices also highlight the benefits of reducing energy demand for both the Net Zero transition and continued economic growth. At the time of writing, the overall effect of the shift in global energy priorities and dynamics on future emissions remain unclear, though moves towards expanding fossil fuel production and pausing reductions in coal use risk increasing near-term global emissions.
classname---H3---UK as a climate leader.
list---ul---As a recognised leader on climate action, the UK’s continued commitment to delivering Net Zero strengthens the global effort.
subList---ul---Implementing the Net Zero Strategy3 and Energy Security Strategy can continue to demonstrate how the low-carbon transition can reduce emissions, reduce consumer costs, and increase energy security by reducing exposure to fossil fuel markets.!!! Follow-up policies on demand reduction would send a strong global signal and bring immediate economic benefit. This would further strengthen the UK’s credibility as a leader and highlight this area as an immediate opportunity internationally.!!! The UK should focus on delivery of its 2030 emissions reduction target (a 68% reduction on 1990 levels by 2030) and set out in detail how this will be achieved in its revised submission to the UN.!!! As President of the UN COP process until November 2022, the UK has a key role in continuing to coordinate international progress, including on climate finance (especially for adaptation) and formalising the sector pledges made at COP26.
KEEPORCODEBREAKS---H4---