classname---H2---Agriculture and Land Use
classname---p---Emissions in agriculture and land use were 50 MtCO2e in 2020 (46 MtCO2e from agriculture and 4 MtCO2e from land use), representing 12% of all UK greenhouse gas emissions. This is a reduction of 2 MtCO2e on 2019.
classname---p---The land use sector must become a net sink by the mid-2030s (i.e. it should be removing CO2 from the atmosphere). This implies major increases in peatland restoration to reach 67,000 hectares/year by 2025, and in annual tree planting to 30,000 hectares by 2025 and 50,000 hectares by 2050. By 2050, woodland cover needs to increase to 18% of UK land area, from 13% currently, and around 80% of peatland must be restored. Due to the time lag before they impact on emissions, these land use changes need to start now.
classname---p---The UK Government’s Net Zero Strategy targets similar emissions reductions to the CCC path at around 34% by 2035 (relative to 2019) across the agriculture and land sectors. This requires a rapid ramp-up of action, driven by strengthened policy. Greater transparency in the Government’s pathway – for example splitting out the agriculture and land sectors – would make it easier to assess if action is meeting Government ambition
classname---H3---Our key messages are:
classname---H4---Slow sector progress.
list---ul---Emissions from agriculture and land use have been relatively flat since 2008, which is inconsistent with the Net Zero target and reflects insufficient progress across the board. Take-up of low-carbon farming and productivity measures has been too low. Land-use changes, such as peat restoration and afforestation, are well below required levels and have yet to meet delivery targets across the UK. 
list---ul---How land can deliver its required multiple functions, including: reducing emissions and sequestering carbon, adapting to climate change, food security, biodiversity, and wider environmental goals. Currently these goals are scattered over multiple Government documents, missing or unclear. They should be brought together and filled out, with a clear vision for what they collectively imply for UK land use.!!!How these multiple objectives can be met without increasing stresses on land or leading to carbon leakage by increasing imports. Productivity improvements can help but may be challenging to achieve as the climate changes. The Committee’s analysis emphasises the importance of the demand-side, particularly the potential to release land through reduced meat and dairy consumption and production. !!!How the UK and devolved governments will collectively ensure that new arrangements are coherent, co-ordinated and consistent. The multiple objectives can be complementary but risk running into conflict with each other if policies are developed separately in siloes. The transition from the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) is a once-ina-generation opportunity to improve policy across agriculture and land at a national scale that is in danger of being missed. This chapter reviews progress reducing emissions from the UK agriculture and land use sectors. A comprehensive strategy for the agriculture and land sectors is urgently needed.!!!How the UK and devolved governments will collectively act to enable positive changes to occur. Key enablers include: innovation support; information, training and skills; funding and access to finance; support for tenant farmers. 
classname---H4---A reliance on innovation.
list---ul---Plans to decarbonise the agriculture sector in the Net Zero Strategy are highly reliant on the take-up of low-carbon farming practices and productivity improvements. This comes with significant risks, as approaches are voluntary, may not yet be mainstream and are dependent on future innovation. As well as reducing emissions at source, measures will need to release land to sequester carbon. A reluctance to consider demand-side measures (i.e. encouraging healthier diets with reduced consumption of meat and dairy) as a complementary measure therefore puts both emissions reduction from agriculture and removals from land at risk. 
classname---H4---More details needed on CAP reform.
list---ul---Further detail on the transition from the CAP is urgently needed across the UK, especially for new agricultural subsidies and land management. Incentives must encourage take-up of low-carbon farming measures and land-use changes such as afforestation and peatland restoration. Changes to land management can take significant time periods and investment to implement. Subsidy agreements must be set over long enough time periods (i.e. beyond the current 2025 focus) and with enough notice to underpin decisions to support farmers and land managers during the transition. 
classname---H2---Emissions trends and drivers 
classname---p---In this section we report emission trends and drivers for the agriculture sector and land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) sector, as reported in the UK greenhouse gas (GHG) inventory. Though these sectors are separate, they are closely related.
list---ul---The agriculture sector includes emissions of GHGs from livestock, agricultural soils, and agricultural machinery.!!!Changes in carbon stock from forests, wetlands, settlements, harvested wood products and from land under agricultural use, such as grassland and croplands, are allocated to the LULUCF sector. Also included within LULUCF are emissions of other non-CO2 gases from drainage and rewetting of soils (excluding croplands and intensive grasslands which are assigned to Agriculture), nitrogen mineralisation associated with loss and gain of soil organic matter, and fires.
classname---H3---(a) Agriculture
classname---p---Emissions from agriculture were 46 MtCO2e in 2020, representing 11% of greenhouse gas emissions in the UK (Figure 8.1), mostly methane and nitrous oxide (Figure 8.2). Emissions estimates are not yet available for 2021. Between 2019 and 2020 emissions from this sector declined by around 3% after a decade of being virtually flat, following falls in preceding decades. 
list---ul---Much of the longer-term reduction was driven by CAP reforms leading to a reduction in livestock numbers, and reduced use of inorganic fertilisers.!!! Methane is the dominant source, driven by enteric fermentation from the digestive processes of livestock, and storage and management of livestock waste and manures (Figure 8.3).!!!Nitrous oxide emissions are driven by use of agricultural fertilisers on soils, and like for methane, agriculture is the dominant source nationally (Figure8.4).!!!  Though stationary and mobile combustion accounts for the vast majority of carbon dioxide emissions (12% of agriculture emissions in 2020), the reduction of carbon dioxide from the liming of agricultural soils contributed to the sector’s overall decline in emissions in 2020. !!!Beef and dairy cattle are the main sources of livestock emissions (Figure 8.5). Livestock are responsible for additional agriculture emissions, through fertiliser applied to grassland and through land used for growing fodder crops.!!!In recent years there has been a gradual decline in emissions intensity from beef, dairy and pigs, as the production of meat and milk has increased at a faster rate than emissions (Figures 8.6 and 8.7). Emission intensity for sheep has been variable across the time period, however the level in 2020 is similar to that in the 1990s. 
subList---ul---The climate has continued to warm due to human activity. Major heatwaves, droughts and forest fires in many regions linked to the changing climate were seen in 2021.
img1---img---
img2---img---
img3---img---
classname---H3---(b) Emissions from Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry 
classname---p---Net emissions from the LULUCF sector represent the balance between land emissions, from sources such as settlements and carbon changes in croplands and grasslands, and removals through natural sequestration such as by forests as they grow.
classname---p---In 2020 UK land use had net emissions of 4 MtCO2e, 0.9% of total GHGs in the UK, and down 0.4 MtCO2e from the previous year. Net emissions have been virtually flat since 2008 but have decreased by 70% since 1990. 
list---ul---Trends. Over the long term, net emissions reductions have come from cropland, grassland, and forests, which respectively made up 18%, 51%1 and 13%2 of the UK’s land use in 2020. In 2020 there was a slight increase in the sink status of forests and a small decline in emissions from wetlands and croplands (Figure 8.8).
list---ul---Forestry is the UK’s largest sink, sequestering 17 MtCO2e in 2020. Historical high rates of afforestation (e.g. pre-2000) have driven long-term increases in sequestration. However, lower tree planting in recent years and the aging profile of existing woodlands have led to a levelling off of sequestration by forestry. Scotland has consistently reported greater planting rates than the rest of the UK combined, with few exceptions since 1990 (Figure 8.9). 
list---ul---Peatlands are the largest source of land emissions, although emissions have fallen by 15% since 1990 (Figure 8.10). Drainage and management of peat for use as croplands and grasslands are the major contributors, with conversion to cropland and settlements further sources of emissions (Figure 8.11). This is despite the low share of peatlands that are currently farmed for crops or intensively managed as grasslands (Figure 8.12).
KEEPORCODEBREAKS---H4---
